[Rank]
The Second Day within the Octave of the Epiphany;;Semidouble;;5.6;;from Sancti/01-06

[Rank] (rubric 196 or rubric 1955)
The Seventh Day of January;;Feria;;1.2;;see Sancti/01-06

[Rule]
from Sancti/01-06
Lesson 1 from Tempora
Doxology=Epiphany
9 lessons
Feria with Te Deum
No First Vespers
Within the Octave of the Epiphany of the Lord

[Responsory1]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory1InfraOctavam
(but Dominican rubric)
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory1

[Responsory2]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory2

[Responsory3]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory3

[Lectio4]
A sermon of Saint Augustine the Bishop  
!Sermon 2 on the Epiphany, which is 30 on the Season  
The Magi came from the East to adore the birth of the Virgin’s Child. We celebrate this day today; we render the discourse owed to this solemnity. To them this day first shone; to us it returns in annual festivity. They were the firstfruits of the Gentiles; we are the people of the Gentiles. To us this was announced by the tongue of the Apostles; to them by the star as the tongue of the heavens; and to us the same Apostles, as other heavens, declared the glory of God.

[Lectio5]
A great mystery: He lay in the manger, and led the Magi from the East. He was hidden in the stable, and recognized in heaven: so that He who was known in heaven might be manifested in the stable, and this day be called Epiphany, which in Latin can be said “manifestation”; commending at once His majesty and His humility, so that He who was shown great in the open heaven by the signs of the stars might be found weak when sought in a narrow lodging, born in infant limbs, wrapped in infant bands, adored by the Magi, feared by the wicked.

[Lectio6]
For King Herod feared Him, when the same Magi announced to him that they were still seeking the little Child whom they had known to be already born with heaven as witness. What shall be the tribunal of the Judge, when the cradle of the infant terrified proud kings? How much wiser for kings not to seek to kill as Herod did, but rather to delight to adore as the Magi did; especially Him who even the death which the enemy wished to inflict, He endured even for the enemies from the enemies, and being slain in His own body, He slew death. Let kings piously fear Him who now sits at the right hand of the Father, whom the impious king feared while still sucking the breasts of His Mother.

[Lectio7]
A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew  
!Matt 2:1-12  
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, Magi from the East came to Jerusalem, saying: Where is He who is born King of the Jews? And the rest.  
_  
From the Homily of Saint Gregory the Pope  
!Homily 10 on the Gospels  
When the birth of our King was known, Herod turned to cunning schemes; and lest he be deprived of his earthly kingdom, he demands that it be announced to him where the Child may be found. He pretends that he wishes to adore Him, so that if He can be found, he may kill Him. But how great is human malice against the counsel of divinity? For it is written: There is no wisdom, no prudence, no counsel against the Lord. For the star which appeared leads the Magi; they find the newborn King, they offer gifts; and they are warned in a dream not to return to Herod. Thus it happens that Jesus, whom Herod seeks, he cannot find. Whose person who else is designated but the hypocrites, who while they seek feignedly, never merit to find the Lord?

[Lectio8]
But among these things we must know that the Priscillianist heretics think that every man is born under the dispositions of the stars; and they take this in support of their error, because a new star arose when the Lord appeared in the flesh; and they think that the same star which appeared was His fate. But if we weigh the words of the Gospel, in which it is said of the same star: Until it came and stood over where the Child was — since it was not the Child who ran to the star, but the star which ran to the Child, if it may be said — it was not the star that was the fate of the Child, but the Child who appeared was the fate of the star.

[Lectio9]
But let it be far from the hearts of the faithful to say that there is any fate. For the life of men is governed by this Creator alone who made them. For man was not made for the stars, but the stars for man; and if the star is said to be the fate of man, man is said to be subject to its ministry. Surely when Jacob came forth from the womb, holding the heel of his elder brother with his hand, the elder could not come forth perfectly unless the younger began; and yet although the mother bore both at one time and in the same moment, the quality of life was not one for both.  
&teDeum

[Ant 2]
From the East * the Magi came to Bethlehem to adore the Lord: and opening their treasures, they offered precious gifts: gold as to a great King; incense as to the true God; myrrh for His burial, alleluia.

[Ant 3]
Seeing the star, the Magi * rejoiced with great joy: and entering the house, they offered the Lord gold, incense, and myrrh, alleluia.
