[Officium]
Saint Marcellus, Pope and Martyr

[Rank]
;;Semidouble;;2.2;;see C2b
(but Cistercian rubric)
;;Commemoration;;1;;see C2

[Rule]
see C2b;
9 lessons

[Name]
Marcellus

[Oratio]
Hear graciously, we beseech You, O Lord, the prayers of Your people: that we may be helped by the merits of blessed Marcellus, Your Martyr and Pontiff, whose passion we rejoice in.
$Through our Lord

[Lectio4]
Marcellus, a Roman, governed the pontificate from the time of Constantius and Galerius up to Maxentius. At his urging, Lucina, a Roman matron, made the Church of God heir of her goods. As the number of the faithful in the City increased, for their benefit — for giving baptism and penance to those who embraced the Christian religion, and for the burial of martyrs — he established new Tituli, and distributed them as though they were additional dioceses. Because of these things, Maxentius, enraged, threatened Marcellus with severe punishments unless, laying aside the pontificate, he would sacrifice to idols.

[Lectio5]
But when he disregarded the mad words of the man, Maxentius sent him to the catabulum, to take care of the beasts which were publicly kept there. In that place Marcellus spent nine months with constant fasting and prayer, visiting the parishes which he could not visit in person by means of letters. Taken from there by the clergy, he was received into the house of blessed Lucina, in whose home he dedicated a church, which today is called by the title of Saint Marcellus; in which both Christians prayed and blessed Marcellus preached.

[Lectio6]
When these things were known, Maxentius ordered the beasts of the catabulum to be transferred into that church, and to be kept by Marcellus; where, afflicted by the foulness of the place and by many hardships, he fell asleep in the Lord. His body was buried by blessed Lucina in the cemetery of Priscilla on the Via Salaria, on the seventeenth day before the Kalends of February. He sat five years, one month, and twenty‑five days. He wrote a letter to the bishops of the province of Antioch concerning the primacy of the Roman Church, showing that it should be called the head of the churches; where it is also written that no council may lawfully be celebrated except by the authority of the Roman Pontiff. In the month of December he ordained in Rome twenty‑five priests, two deacons, and twenty‑one bishops for various places.

[Lectio94]
Marcellus, a Roman, governed the pontificate from Constantius and Galerius up to Maxentius. At his urging, Lucina, a Roman matron, made the Church of God heir of her goods. As the number of the faithful in the City increased, he established new Tituli and distributed them as though they were additional dioceses. Therefore Maxentius, enraged, threatened severe punishments unless, laying aside the pontificate, he would sacrifice to idols. The Pontiff resisted sharply, and so he was sent to the catabulum to take care of the beasts which were publicly kept there. He spent nine months there, visiting the parishes which he could not visit in person by letters. Taken from there by the clergy, he was received into the house of blessed Lucina, in whose home he dedicated a church, where he preached to the faithful. Then Maxentius ordered the beasts of the catabulum to be transferred into that church and kept by Marcellus; who, afflicted by the foulness of the place and by hardships, fell asleep in the Lord. His body was buried by blessed Lucina in the cemetery of Priscilla on the Via Salaria on the sixteenth day of January.  
&teDeum

[Responsory8]
R. O Lord, You have gone before him with blessings of sweetness:  
* You have placed upon his head a crown of precious stone.  
V. He asked life of You, and You granted him length of days forever and ever.  
R. You have placed upon his head a crown of precious stone.  
&Gloria  
R. You have placed upon his head a crown of precious stone.

[Responsory8] (Tridentine rubric)
@Commune/C2a
