[Rank]
On the Octave of the Epiphany;;Greater Double;;6.3;;from Sancti/01-06
(but Tridentine rubric)
On the Octave of the Epiphany;;Greater Double;;6.9;;from Sancti/01-06
(but rubric 196)
Commemoration of the Baptism of Our Lord Jesus Christ;;Double II Class;;5;;from Sancti/01-06
(but rubric 1962)
On the Commemoration of the Baptism of Our Lord Jesus Christ;;Double II Class;;5;;from SanctiOP/01-06
(but rubric 1955)
Commemoration of the Baptism of Our Lord Jesus Christ;;Greater Double;;4;;from Sancti/01-06

[Rule]
from Sancti/01-06;
Lesson 1 from Tempora
Doxology=Epiphany
9 lessons
Comkey=20
(rubric 196 says)
no commemoration
Feast of the Lord

[Responsory Vespera 1]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory Breve Tertia

[Ant 1] (Cistercian or Dominican rubric)
The soldier baptizes * the King, the servant his Lord, John the Savior: the water of Jordan is astonished: the dove bears witness: the voice of the Father is heard: This is my Son.

[Oratio]
O God, whose Only‑begotten appeared in the substance of our flesh: grant, we beseech You, that through Him whom we outwardly recognize as like unto us, we may merit to be inwardly reformed:
$Who with You

[Responsory1]
@Sancti/01-06

[Responsory2]
@Sancti/01-06

[Responsory3]
@Sancti/01-06

[Lectio4]
A sermon of Saint Gregory Nazianzen  
!Oration on the Holy Lights  
I cannot restrain the delight of joy, but I am lifted up in mind and moved; and forgetting my own smallness, I strive to take upon myself the office of the great John — rather, his service — and I long for it: and although I am not the Forerunner, yet I come from the desert. Christ is enlightened — rather, He enlightens us with His own brightness. Christ is baptized — let us descend with Him, that we may ascend with Him together.

[Lectio5]
John baptizes, and Jesus approaches, sanctifying indeed even him who baptizes, but especially so that He may bury the old Adam in the waters, and above all, that through these things the waters of Jordan may be sanctified: so that as there was spirit and flesh, so also to those who were to be baptized there might be handed down the succession of sanctification in spirit and water. The Baptist does not accept; Jesus insists. “I,” He says, “have need to be baptized by you.” The lamp speaks to the Sun, and the voice speaks to the Word.

[Lectio6]
Jesus ascends from the water, drawing up and raising the world with Him, as it were submerged with Him; and He saw heaven not divided, but opened — which that Adam had once closed for Himself and for us after Him; just as paradise had been closed by a fiery sword. The Holy Spirit bears witness: for like things run together to like. A testimony is brought from heaven: for from there was He of whom testimony is borne.

[Lectio7]
A reading from the holy Gospel according to John  
!John 1:29-34  
At that time: John saw Jesus coming to him, and said: Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who takes away the sin of the world. And the rest.  
_  
A homily of Saint Augustine the Bishop  
!Tractate 6 on John, before the middle  
Before the Lord came to be baptized by John in the Jordan, he had known Him by those words in which he said: “You come to me to be baptized? I ought to be baptized by You.” Behold, he knew the Lord, he knew the Son of God. How do we prove that he already knew that He would baptize in the Holy Spirit? Before He came to the river, when many were running to John to be baptized, he said to them: “I indeed baptize you in water; but He who comes after me is greater than I, whose sandal strap I am not worthy to loose: He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire.” He already knew this.

[Lectio8]
What then did he learn by the dove, lest he be found a liar afterwards (which God forbid we should think), except that some particular property in Christ would be such that although many ministers would baptize — whether just or unjust — the holiness of baptism would be attributed only to Him upon whom the dove descended, of whom it was said: “This is He who baptizes in the Holy Spirit”? Let Peter baptize — it is He who baptizes. Let Paul baptize — it is He who baptizes. Let Judas baptize — it is He who baptizes. For if baptism is holy according to the diversity of merits, then because merits are diverse, baptisms would be diverse; and each would be thought to receive something better according as he seemed to receive it from one better.

[Lectio9]
The saints themselves (understand, brothers), the good belonging to the dove, belonging to the lot of that city Jerusalem — the good in the Church, of whom the Apostle says: “The Lord knows who are His” — have diverse graces, not all have equal merits. Some are holier than others, some better than others. Why then, if one is baptized by one who is, for example, just and holy, and another by one of lesser merit before God, of lesser rank, of lesser continence, of lesser life — why is what they receive one and equal and the same, except because it is He who baptizes?  
&teDeum
