[Officium]
Saint Canutus, King and Martyr

[Rank]
;;Simple;;1.1;;see C2a‑1
(but Tridentine rubric)
;;Semidouble;;2.2;;see C2a‑1

[Rule]
see C2a‑1;
(Tridentine rubric) 9 lessons

[Oratio]
O God, who deigned to adorn blessed Canutus the king with the palm of martyrdom and glorious miracles for the illumination of Your Church: grant graciously that, just as he was an imitator of the Passion of the Lord, so we, walking in his footsteps, may merit to arrive at eternal joys.
$Through the same

[Lectio4]
Canutus IV, son of Sweyn Estrithson, king of the Danes, distinguished for faith, piety, and moral integrity, gave from his earliest years a remarkable example of holiness. Having attained the paternal scepter with the unanimous acclamation of all, he began diligently to promote religion, to increase the revenues of churches, and to adorn them with precious furnishings. Then, inflamed with zeal for spreading the faith, he attacked barbarous kingdoms in just warfare, and subdued conquered nations to the Christian law. Glorious with many victories and enriched with wealth, he cast his royal diadem at the feet of Christ crucified, subjecting himself and his kingdom to Him who is King of kings and Lord of lords. He chastised his body with fasts, hair‑shirts, and scourges. Constant in prayer and contemplation, lavish toward the poor, beneficent toward all, he never deviated from the path of justice and divine law.

[Lectio5]
Imbued with these and other virtues, the holy king hastened toward the summit of perfection. It happened that the kingdom of England was invaded by William, duke of the Normans, with a formidable army. When the English implored the help of the Danes, and the king resolved to assist them, he entrusted the military expedition to his brother Olaf. But Olaf, enticed by the desire of reigning, turned his arms to the ruin of the king, stirring up soldiers and people against him. Nor were incentives lacking for rebellion. For when the king, by published laws, decreed that tithes be paid to the churches, that the precepts of God and the Church be observed, and that transgressors be punished, many perverse and wicked men, enraged, first began to riot, then to stir up the populace, and finally to plot the death of the most holy king.

[Lectio6]
Knowing therefore, and foreseeing future things, that death threatened him for justice’s sake, he foretold it, and went to the church of Saint Alban the Martyr at Odense, as to the place of combat; and fortified by the sacraments, he commended his struggle to the Lord. Soon the multitude of conspirators arrived there, attempted to set fire to the church, to break down the doors, and to burst in. When they could not accomplish this, approaching the windows, they did not cease to hurl stones and arrows with great force at the holy king, who, kneeling, prayed for his enemies; until, struck by stones and missiles, and finally pierced by a lance, he fell before the altar with arms outstretched, crowned with glorious martyrdom, while Gregory VII sat on the apostolic throne. God afterwards glorified His Martyr with many miracles. For Denmark, oppressed by severe famine and various calamities, paid the penalty for the sacrilege committed. Many also afflicted with various illnesses obtained remedy and health at his tomb. And when the queen attempted secretly by night to steal his sacred body and transfer it elsewhere, she was terrified by a great light sent from heaven and ceased from her purpose.

[Lectio7]
@Commune/C2-1

[Lectio8]
@Commune/C2-1

[Lectio9]
@Commune/C2-1
