[Officium]
Saint Anthony, Abbot

[Rank]
;;Double;;3;;see C5b
(but Cistercian rubric)
;;Double;;1.2;;see C5

[Rule]
see C5b;
9 lessons
(but Cistercian rubric)
3 lessons

[Name]
Anthony

[Lectio4]
Anthony the Egyptian, born of noble and Christian parents, whom he lost in youth, when entering the church heard from the Gospel: “If you wish to be perfect, go, sell all that you have, and give to the poor.” As though these words were spoken to himself, he judged that he must obey Christ the Lord. Therefore, having sold his family estate, he distributed all the money to the poor. Freed from these impediments, he began to cultivate on earth the manner of heavenly life. But when he descended into that dangerous contest, he thought he must add to the defense of faith — with which he was armed — the help of the other virtues; and he was so inflamed with zeal for them that whenever he saw anyone excelling in some virtue, he strove to imitate him.

[Lectio5]
Nothing was more continent than he, nothing more watchful. In patience, meekness, mercy, humility, labor, and study of divine Scripture he surpassed all. He so abhorred the meeting and conversation of heretics and schismatics, especially Arians, that he said one should not even go near them. He lay on the ground when necessary sleep overtook him. He practiced fasting so strictly that he used only salt with bread, quenched thirst with water, and did not refresh himself with food or drink before sunset; often he abstained from food for two days; very often he spent the night in prayer. When Anthony had become such and so great a soldier of God, the enemy of the human race attacked the holy youth with various temptations, which he overcame by fasting and prayer. Nor did frequent triumph over Satan make Anthony secure, who knew the innumerable arts of the devil to harm.

[Lectio6]
Therefore he withdrew into the vast desert of Egypt; where, advancing daily toward Christian perfection, he so despised the demons (whose assaults were the fiercer the stronger Anthony became in resisting) that he reproached them for their weakness; and often, stirring his disciples to fight against the devil, teaching with what weapons he was conquered, he said: “Believe me, brothers, Satan fears the vigils of the pious, prayers, fasts, voluntary poverty, mercy and humility — but above all the burning love for Christ the Lord, by whose single sign of the most holy Cross he is weakened and flees.” He was so formidable to demons that many throughout Egypt who were tormented by them were freed when the name of Anthony was invoked over them. So great was his fame for holiness that Constantine the Great and his sons commended themselves by letters to his prayers. When he was living his one hundred and fifth year, having innumerable imitators of his way of life, and having called the monks together and instructed them in the perfect rule of Christian life, illustrious in holiness and miracles, he departed to heaven on the sixteenth day before the Kalends of February.

[Lectio94]
Anthony the Egyptian, when entering the church heard from the Gospel: “If you wish to be perfect, go, sell all that you have, and give to the poor,” as though these words were spoken to himself, he judged that he must obey Christ the Lord. Therefore, having sold his family estate, he distributed the price to the poor, and withdrew into the vast desert of Egypt. He was so inflamed with zeal for all virtues that whenever he saw anyone excelling in some virtue, he strove to imitate him. Nothing was more continent than he, nothing more watchful. He was so terrifying to demons that many throughout Egypt who were tormented by them were freed when the name of Anthony was invoked over them. Thus, illustrious in holiness and miracles, having innumerable imitators of his way of life, living his one hundred and fifth year, he departed this life on the sixteenth day before the Kalends of February.  
&teDeum
