[Officium]
Saint Paul the First Hermit, Confessor

[Rank]
;;Double;;3;;see C5
(but rubric 1570 or 1617)
;;Semidouble;;2.2;;see C5
(but rubric 1930 or 1963 or Cistercian)
;;Memoria;;1.1;;see C5

[Rule]
see C5; mtv
9 lessons

[Name]
Paul

[Lectio4]
Paul, founder and master of hermits, born in the lower Thebaid, was deprived of his parents at the age of fifteen. Later, to avoid the persecution of Decius and Valerian, and to serve God more freely, he withdrew into a cave in the desert; where, with a palm tree providing him food and clothing, he lived to the age of one hundred and thirteen, at which time he was visited by Antony, ninety years old, at God’s prompting. When they greeted each other by name — though they had not known each other before — and spoke much about the kingdom of God, a raven, which had always brought Paul half a loaf, brought a whole one.

[Lectio5]
After the raven departed, “Behold,” said Paul, “the Lord has sent us a meal, truly kind, truly merciful. For sixty years now I have received daily a fragment of half a loaf; now at your arrival Christ has doubled the ration for His soldiers.” Therefore, giving thanks, they took food at the spring, where they were refreshed for a time; and again giving thanks to God as usual, they spent the night in divine praises. At dawn Paul, warning Antony of the death that was near for him, urged him to bring the cloak which he had received from Athanasius to wrap his body. Returning from the journey, Antony saw Paul’s soul ascending to heaven among choirs of Angels, and among companies of Prophets and Apostles.

[Lectio6]
When he reached his cell, he found the lifeless body with knees bent, neck raised, and hands stretched upward. Wrapping the body in the cloak, and chanting hymns and psalms according to Christian tradition, since he had no tool to dig the earth, two lions from the inner desert came running swiftly to the body of the blessed old man; so that it might easily be understood that they were expressing grief in the way they could. Competing with each other, they dug the earth with their feet and made a grave large enough to hold a man. When they had departed, Antony placed the holy body in that place; and covering it with earth, he arranged the tomb according to Christian custom. The tunic of Paul, which he had woven for himself from palm leaves in the manner of a basket, Antony took with him, and used that garment on the solemn days of Easter and Pentecost as long as he lived.

[Lectio94]
Paul, founder and master of hermits, born in the lower Thebaid, when the persecution of Decius and Valerian raged, withdrew into a cave in the desert; where, with a palm tree providing him food and clothing, he lived most holily to the age of one hundred and thirteen, at which time he was visited by Antony, ninety years old. Paul received him with great kindness, and after their holy conversations extended far into the night, he warned him of the death that was near for him, and urged him to bring the cloak which he had received from Athanasius to wrap his body. While Antony was doing this, returning from the journey, he saw Paul’s soul ascending to heaven; and found the body in the cell, appearing as though praying. Saddened, he wrapped it in the cloak, and chanting hymns as usual, since he had no tool to dig the earth, two lions came from the inner part of the desert and dug a place large enough for one man. Then Antony, having buried the body and arranged the tomb, departed, taking with him Paul’s tunic woven from palm leaves; which garment he used on the more solemn days of Easter and Pentecost as long as he lived.  
&teDeum

[Lectio7]
@Sancti/02-24:Lectio7

[Lectio8]
@Sancti/02-24:Lectio8

[Lectio9]
@Sancti/02-24:Lectio9
