[Rank]
The Sixth Day within the Octave of the Epiphany;;Semidouble;;5.6;;from Sancti/01-06

[Rank] (rubric 196 or rubric 1955)
The Eleventh Day of January;;Feria;;1.2;;see Sancti/01-06

[Rule]
from Sancti/01-06
Lesson 1 from Tempora
Doxology=Epiphany
9 lessons
Feria with Te Deum
Within the Octave of the Epiphany of the Lord
(on the day of the Baptism of the Lord) No Second Vespers

[Ant 1]
@Sancti/01-10:Ant 3

[Responsory1]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory1InfraOctavam

[Responsory2]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory2

[Responsory3]
@Sancti/01-06:Responsory3

[Lectio4]
A sermon of Saint Fulgentius the Bishop  
!From Sermon 5 on the Epiphany, at the beginning  
God Himself, who in the Old Testament commanded that firstfruits be offered to Him, when born as man dedicated the firstfruits of the Gentiles to His worship. The shepherds were the firstfruits of the Jews; the Magi became the firstfruits of the Gentiles. The former were brought from nearby, the latter were led from afar. “Where is He,” they say, “who is born King of the Jews?” Sons had already been born of Herod, king of the Jews. Archelaus was born in a palace; Christ in a lodging. Archelaus, born, was placed on a silver couch; Christ, born, was laid in a very small manger: and yet he who was born in a palace is despised, while He who was born in a lodging is sought; the former is not named at all by the Magi, the latter, once found, is devoutly adored.

[Lectio5]
Who is this King of the Jews? Poor yet rich, humble yet exalted. Who is this King of the Jews, who is carried as a little child, yet adored as God? Small in the manger, immense in heaven; lowly in swaddling clothes, glorious in the stars. Why are you so troubled, Herod? This King who is born has not come to overcome kings by fighting, but to subdue them wondrously by dying. He was not born to succeed you, but that the world might faithfully believe in Him. He has come, therefore, not to fight while living, but to triumph when slain.

[Lectio6]
This Child, who is now called King of the Jews by the Magi, is the same Creator and Lord of the Angels. Therefore, the infancy of Him who is born you fear; you ought rather to fear the omnipotence of Him who judges. Do not fear Him as successor to your kingdom, but fear Him as the most just condemner of your unbelief. “Go,” he says, “and report to me, so that I too may come and adore Him.” O feigned cunning, O impious unbelief, O fraudulent wickedness! The blood of the Innocents, which you cruelly shed, bears witness to what you intended concerning this Child.

[Lectio7]
A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew  
!Matt 2:1-12  
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, Magi from the East came to Jerusalem, saying: Where is He who is born King of the Jews? And the rest.  
_  
A homily of Saint Ambrose the Bishop  
!Book 2 on Luke, chapter 2, after the beginning  
What are these gifts of true faith? Gold for the King, incense for God, myrrh for the one who is dead. For one is the insignia of kingship, another the sacrament of divine power, another the honor of burial, which does not corrupt the body of the dead but preserves it. We also, who hear and read these things, let us bring forth such gifts, brothers, from our treasures. For we have a treasure in earthen vessels. If therefore you must not judge in yourself what you are from yourself, but from Christ, how much more in Christ must you judge not what is yours, but what is Christ’s?

[Lectio8]
Therefore the Magi offer gifts from their treasures. Do you wish to know what good merit they have? The star is seen by them; where Herod is, it is not seen; where Christ is, it is seen again and shows the way. Therefore this star is the way, and the way is Christ: for according to the mystery of the Incarnation, Christ is the star. “A star shall rise out of Jacob, and a man shall spring forth from Israel.” Finally, where Christ is, there also is the star. For He Himself is the bright and morning star. He therefore marks Himself by His own light.

[Lectio9]
Receive another lesson. The Magi came by one way, they return by another. For those who have seen Christ have understood Christ; they return better than they came. For there are two ways: one which leads to destruction; the other which leads to the kingdom. The former is the way of sins, which leads to Herod; the latter is Christ, by whom one returns to the homeland. For here is a temporal exile, as it is written: “My soul has been long a sojourner.”  
&teDeum

[Ant 2]
Those who spoke ill of you * shall come to you, and shall adore the footsteps of your feet.

[Ant 3]
Warned in a dream, * the Magi returned to their own region by another way.
